Justify why you picked these set of states, and how they model the agent and its environment.


Based on the problem setup, I believe the best way to choose the possible states that the agent can be is by looking at the set of inputs available and make some combinations that model both the agent and the environment with the most description. According to the problem specification, the agent has an egocentric view of the grid intersection it is at being able to see if there are other agents in front of itself, or in one of the both side roadways. The agent can also sense the state of semaphore, thus, being able to identify it as green or red along with the nextwaypoint that it should take in order to reach the destination. Based on these data, a possible state the agent can be is defined by the combination of these input sensory data. For instance, suppose the agent is at some intersection where the semaphore is green, and there are not agents in any of the incoming roadways. This state is represented as:

light: green, left: None, oncoming: None, nextwaypoint: forward

As another example, suppose the agent is at an intersection and there is another agent in front of it that wants to turn right, and the semaphore is red.

light: red, left: None, oncoming: right, nextwaypoint: forward

Note also that in both cases the agent should go forward to comply with the destination goal.

With this structure, we can model the necessary number of states that can differentiate the various states that the agent can be based on the variety of input possibilities that there are. One thing that is worth noting is that there is no indication in this state representation that there could be an agent coming from the road in the right. There is because according to the traffic rules stated for this project, the fact that there is a car coming from the right or not does not affect the current agent at all. In other words, regardless of the semaphore color, the addition of an agent coming from the right does not create a new situation or traffic violation, and that also helps the model to keep a concise Q-Learning table which in turn, benefits the agents performance.

Another worth mentioning detail is the fact that to keep the QTable as small and concise as I could, I decided to not hard code all of the possible states at the beginning, but incrementally adding the states to the QTable as it is needed. This is also another strategy that I found would keep the QTable simpler and then better to understand.

What changes do you notice in the agent’s behavior?

After implementing a basic version of Q-Learning and programme the agent to use, instead of a random selected action, the best action from the Q-Learning table some aspects regarding the behaviour of the agent have changed. Firstly and most important this scenario brings to the light the trade-off between exploration and exploitation. It is pretty clear that only choosing the best action from the QTable since the beginning, hurts the model in the sense that depending on what action it will choose to break ties, the result can be very different. Because the QTable starts with 0s all over it, for any action the agent asks the QTable for, the result will be the same because of the way the Q-Learning equation works. Because the agent has not seen most of the states at the beginning of the process, it did not learn anything about them, therefore, when the Q-Learning tries to pick the best option, there is no best option yet so one of the 4 actions must be chosen to break ties. In my experiments, when the None option is the one chosen in this situation, the agent simply does not move and consequently does not learn anything at all. However, when the forward option is chosen, the agent surprisingly acts very well reaching the destination long before the 100 trials. I believe that is the core of the exploration exploitation dilema, in order to use what it knows (exploitation) the agent must first learns the environment (exploration), and it is clear in the first case that when the action is None (for breaking ties) there no exploration and consequently the agent is not able to learn anything about environment. On the other hand, in the case of the 'forward' action for breaking ties, the agent gets the chance to learn the environment when there is no best option from the QTable yet available, which in turn makes the agent able to fill the table with optimum values that helps in the future decisions.